---
layout: post
title:  "bcftools usage"
date:   2020-05-26 18:57:57 -0400
categories: jekyll update
---

Extract first 6 columns of bcf file into variant list:

{% highlight bash %}

bcftools reheader -h new.header output.vcf.bgz
#=> change header.

bcftools view VX.vcf -Oz -o VX.vcf.bgz
#=> compress VCF into VCF.bgz

bcftools query -f'%CHROM\t%POS\t%ID\t%REF\t%ALT\t%QUAL\t%FILTER\t.\t.\n' example.bcf > ../../example-variant-list.vcf &
#=> extract the first 9 columns of the bcf/vcf file.

bcftools query -f'%CHROM\t%POS\t%ID\t%REF\t%ALT\t%QUAL\t%FILTER\t%INFO/QC\t.\n' example.vcf.bgz > example.siztes.vcf 
#=> extract the first 9 columns of the bcf/vcf file.

bcftools index VX.Full.vcf.bgz
#=> index VCF files

bcftools norm -m-both input.vcf.gz -o output.vcf
bcftools norm -m -any input.vcf.bgz -Ov -o output.m.vcf
#=> Split multi-allelic variants calls into separate lines. Sometimes it reports none of the variants can be decomposed despite the presence of such variants in the file.

bcftools norm -f hg38.fasta input.vcf -o output.m.vcf
#=> Perform the actual left-normalization. The FASTA file is needed. 

bcftools stats VX.Full.vcf.bgz > VX.stats.txt
#=> calculate the stats of the VCF files. 

bcftools stats VX.Full.vcf.bgz GX.Full.vcf.bgz > GTX.stats.txt
#=> calculate the stats of the two VCF files (degree of Overlap, Ts/Tv, etc). 

bcftools isec -p OverlapVG VX.vcf.bgz GX.vcf.bgz
#=> intersect two VCF files.

bcftools merge -m all A.bcf B.bcf C.bcf -Oz -o merged.bgz
#=> Merged BCF/VCF files (A,B,C) into one merged.bgz vcf file.

bcftools merge --force-samples -m all A.bcf B.bcf C.bcf -Oz -o merged.bgz
#=> during the merged if there are overlapping samples use the --force-samples.

{% endhighlight %}

Check out the [bcftools docs][bcftools-docs] for more info on how to get the most out of bcftools. 
File all bugs/feature requests at [Best Bioinformatics’s GitHub repo][best-bioinformatics-gh].

[bcftools-docs]: http://samtools.github.io/bcftools/bcftools.html
[best-bioinformatics-gh]: https://github.com/best-bioinformatics/samtools.github.com
